TODO update from 2019
> NOTE: This document is an english interpretation of its swedish counterpart. The chapter is solely regulated by the contents of the swedish version. 
> 
> In case of unclear translations or other discrepancies please contact [the chapter's board](mailto:drek@datasektionen.se).

##§1 Background## 
This document shall have two different purposes. Firstly, it shall contain the regulations regarding how the chapter’s economy is managed. Secondly, the document shall function as a quick educational resource for how D-officers and committees shall take care of their economy and economic accounting.
##§2 Accounting duty##
Committees that have accounting duty such as DKM, the Reception, Prylmångleriet and certain projects are obligated to handle their own accounting. Accounting shall be done continuously with the goal of it being done before the next turn of the month as long as it’s not summer vacation. In addition to this objective, the Treasurer can set additional accounting deadlines. If a committee or project does not meet the given deadlines, the D-directorate has the right to apply restrictions to its activities such as forbidding usage of the chapter’s serving license. If a committee or project does its accounting continuously and works toward the given deadlines, the committee/project can be rewarded. One can get extra funds to its MUTA/fika/team building budget. Whether to distribute these funds is determined and performed by the Treasurer.
##§3 Debts to those committed##
Receipts for purchases done for the chapter shall be at the latest handed in 30 days after the purchase, in order for the debt to be paid back. After that the repayment can be denied. Debts shall be paid back within 5 weeks (excluding during holidays) under the assumption that all information is correctly registered and it’s unambiguous for what purpose the purchase was made.
##§4 Handling of cash##
The chapter has a hand box named centralt, which is used by the Reception, DKM and the chapter at large. Transactions between hand boxes shall be accounted by the source of the transaction. Sums that exceed 1000 kronor shall not be stored in the chapter hall for longer than one night and then only inside a locked area. The exception from this rule is cash that is stored in the safe deposit box.
##§5 Storage##
##§5.1 Management of beverage stores##
DKM manages the chapter’s beverage stores, except under the reception period where the Reception will be delegated that assignment. This implies that it’s mainly DKM that will refill the stores and document the refilling. Spirits, wine, cider and beer that is served on pub and club activities shall be stocked. The beverage stores shall be taken stock of on a bi monthly basis at the least. Additionally, it should be done before and after the reception period. The inventory of the beverage stores shall be synchronized with the accounting on a result group specified by the Treasurer. The flat rate mentioned in §5.2 shall be adapted with the intent to minimize the difference in the stock.
###§5.2 beverage stores during parties###
When a committee or project throws a party and uses the chapter’s beverage stores, it shall be entered into the accounts by the accounting responsible for the committee or project that is responsible for the party. The committee or project shall both be responsible for purchasing the drinks and the sales for these. The cost for the purchase shall be calculated according to the flat rate provided by the Treasurer. The serving manager for the party is responsible for that payment and an end of day report is made according to the chapter’s standards. The serving manager is also responsible for the treatment of any possible hand boxes according to §4 in this document. The serving manager shall within a reasonable time before the party contact the committee that manages the beverage stores and inform oneself of the current regulations regarding the chapter’s beverage stores. 
###§5.3 Other stores###
Other stores (the overalls stores for instance) shall be taken stock of once every year at the least. Such stocktaking shall be reported to the Treasurer as soon as possible.
##§6 Receipts## 
A receipt or alternatively an invoice shall be offered in some form for all sales.
##§7 invoices##
###§7.1 Purchase by invoice###
Purchases by invoice implies for the most part that one uses one of the chapter’s credit agreements. This can be done by the chapter’s officers, both directly (the officer uses the credit agreement) or indirectly (by order of an officer, a person uses the credit agreement). The officer shall see to that there’s enough budget for the costs. When purchasing wares for an agency within the chapter, credit agreements written by other agencies within the chapter can be used. However, the buyer is responsible for being informed on the limits of the credit agreement. As soon as it is known, the Treasurer shall be informed of purchases which exceed 50000 kr that can affect the chapter’s economy at large. All invoices in the chapter’s name shall be sent to the chapter’s current invoice address.
###§7.2 sales by invoice### 
Invoices issued by the chapter shall be created through a method specified by the Treasurer. Committees are responsible for continuously verifying that sent invoices are paid on time. A copy of the invoice shall be given to the accounting responsible. 
##§8 Budget##
The budget is an instrument used to attempt to plan and predict how the economy of the operation year will look like. The budget shall be followed as much as possible, although if reality won’t allow this, one will be forced to disregard the budget. If a budget violation has to be made, the Treasurer must be informed of this before the violation has occurred. In the overall budget that is determined on SM, the following posts are present: revenue, expenses, external balance and internal balance. In addition, it is required that each committee and project on SM can present a retail budget which corresponds to or is less than the external balance and internal balance in the overall budget. Officers that have a retail budget can counsel with the chapter board and together revise this budget in preparation for or during an operation year. Such changes shall be presented at a board meeting (DM).
###§8.1 Explanation###
revenue is the sum of the committee’s revenues throughout the year. Expenses is the sum of the committee’s expenses throughout the year. External balance is the balance for the events and budget posts that affect the whole chapter. Examples of these are sittings the whole chapter is invited to, stocks in META, pubs and so on. Internal balance is the balance on event and budget posts that affect a small group within the chapter, such as the board, DKM, other committees with events where everyone is not invited. Examples for these sorts of events and budget posts are food for work (MUTA), teambuilding, fika, party, bungy jump, paintball, cruise, thailand vacation and so on. It is especially important that these costs do not exceed the budget. What is deemed external and internal is determined by the instances in §A.
###§8.2 Obligation###
This freedom to shape a budget still requires that money is laid on the right things and that those with the right to pay for the expenses can deny payment, if the regulations within this document are not followed. The decision can be appealed according to the order in §A.
###§8.3 Usage of fika budget###
Fika budget shall go to purchases of fika on meetings or other activities. It is not necessary to offer fika on all activities. However, in the cases where fika is offered, it should be available for all activity participants. At least two people shall be present on an activity in order for money to be taken from the fika budget. Fika shall not replace a meal.
##§9 Funds##
The CS chapter has in addition to those funds that are regulated in the statutes two other funds, namely the hall fund and the jubilee fund. How these funds can be used is regulated below, other usage of fund assets shall be determined by SM.
###§9.1 Hall fund###
The hall fund assets shall be used to purchase larger products to the hall and to see to that the chapter has a buffer in case the chapter needs to change chapter hall.
usage of the hall fund’s assets is determined by the D-directorate at DM (board meeting). The fund’s assets shall only be used to pay for products and renovations in the chapter hall.
The hall fund shall have enough assets for the payment of a hall relocation.
###§9.2 Jubilee fund###
The jubilee fund’s purpose is to prevent a single year’s budget being stressed unnecessarily heavily in those years where the CS chapter is celebrating its anniversary. This money shall be allowed to be used for anniversary celebrations if board decisions deem it so. Since the fund’s assets are not meant to be used every year, it is appropriate that the assets are deposited with this in mind.
Deposits to the jubilee fund shall be of such size that the fund shall reach a sum of 10 price base amount when an anniversary celebration occurs.
## §10 Subsidy of profile clothing ##
Clothes that belong to the member, e.g. hoodies with personal print or the reception shirts, are divided into two groups, uniform and profile clothing. What falls under uniform is determined by DM and must be justified by external regulations from, for example, the Licensing Unit or THS.
Profile clothing may be subsidized to a maximum of 50% of the purchase price. The amount to be subsidized must be budgeted and categorized as an internal cost.
The exception is if you have received the profile clothes sponsored. Sponsorship is then used to pay for the amount not paid for by the chapter. Thus, the entire shirt can be paid for by getting 50% or more of the shirt sponsored and the chapter goes in and pays the remaining amount from the budget.
## §11 Access##
Signatories have access to view and manage all the chapter's assets and transactions at the bank. Auditors have access to see all the chapter's assets and transactions at the bank. The committee presidents and project leaders for committees and projects that have accounting duty must have access to see and manage the assets that are in their own committee's bank account. Accounting officers appointed by the committee president or project leader have the right to see assets and transactions in the committee's / project's bank account.
In addition to these bank accesses, the D-directorate can, through a decision at DM, decide to give other people access to see and / or manage the chapter's assets. Signatories also have the right to withdraw people's accesses, which must then be tested at the next DM.
## §12 Certification ##
All expenses must be certified. Those who have the right to certify / reject an expense are, in ascending order, committee president / project leader for committees / projects that are subject to accounting duty and signatories. The committee president / project leader only has the right to certify expenses that are charged to the budget for which they are responsible. Rejection can be appealed according to the procedure in §A. However, one may not certify any expenses where oneself have spent money or benefited greatly from the nature of the expense (eg MUTA to oneself). In addition to these rights, the D-directorate can, in consultation with the committee president / project leader, decide on extra certification rights at DM. An expense is certified through the chapter's system for that purpose. An invoice is certified either through the chapter's system for that purpose or by approving the invoice payment at the bank.
## §13 Agreements##
According to Swedish law, agreements can only be signed by signatories or holders of a power of attorney. Anyone wishing to sign an agreement in the chapter's name must contact a signatory as soon as possible to investigate the possibility of doing so. Agreements or the issuance of a power of attorney are decided to be signed either through DM, with support in regulation documents or with standard agreements. Agreements can in exceptional cases be signed retroactively. The person who by proxy signs an agreement in the name of the chapter is responsible for the original agreement being sent and received by the signatory as soon as possible. Signatories are responsible for keeping all the chapter's current applied agreements in an orderly and collective manner.
## §A Decision procedure ##
In order to have an organization where we can make quick decisions but at the same time have legal certainty, the parts that refer to this paragraph are assessed by the following bodies in ascending order: Treasurer, board, auditors, SM. If you believe that a decision is incorrect, you can therefore appeal to a higher instance.
